README.md, before:

# ChessGemma: Fine-tuning Gemma-3 for Chess Q&A

A chess AI system that fine-tunes Google's Gemma-3 270M model for chess-related question answering using LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) on Apple Silicon with MPS acceleration.

## Project Overview

ChessGemma combines several components:
- **Fine-tuned Language Model**: Gemma-3 270M with LoRA adapters for chess knowledge
- **Chess Engine Integration**: Stockfish integration for move validation and analysis
- **Web Interface**: Flask-based web application for interaction
- **Evaluation Framework**: Chess-specific metrics and testing tools

## Key Features

- **Efficient Training**: LoRA fine-tuning with Unsloth optimization
- **Apple Silicon Support**: MPS acceleration for M-series Macs
- **Chess Engine Integration**: Stockfish for move validation and position analysis
- **Web Interface**: Interactive chess Q&A interface
- **Evaluation Tools**: Chess-specific metrics and testing framework
- **Multiple Training Configurations**: Flexible training setups for different use cases

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Apple Silicon Mac (M1/M2/M3) or compatible system
- 8GB+ RAM (16GB recommended)
- Stockfish chess engine (optional, for advanced features)

### Installation

1. **Clone and setup environment:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/lukifer23/GemmaFischer.git
cd GemmaFischer
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
```

2. **Install dependencies:**
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. **Install Stockfish (optional):**
```bash
# macOS with Homebrew
brew install stockfish

# Or download from https://stockfishchess.org/download/
```

### Basic Usage

1. **Run inference with pre-trained model:**
```bash
python src/inference/inference.py --download
```

2. **Start web interface:**
```bash
python src/web/app.py
# Visit http://localhost:5000
```

3. **Run training (smoke test):**
```bash
python src/training/train.py --do_train --max_steps 10
```

## Project Structure

```
GemmaFischer/
├── README.md                 # This file
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── docs/                     # Documentation
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md      # System architecture
│   ├── TRAINING_GUIDE.md    # Training instructions
│   ├── API_REFERENCE.md     # API documentation
│   └── PROJECT_PLAN.md      # Future development roadmap
├── src/                      # Source code
│   ├── training/            # Training scripts
│   │   ├── train.py         # Main training script
│   │   ├── train_lora_poc.py # LoRA proof-of-concept
│   │   └── configs/         # Training configurations
│   ├── inference/           # Inference and chess engine
│   │   ├── inference.py     # Model inference
│   │   └── chess_engine.py  # Stockfish integration
│   ├── evaluation/          # Evaluation and testing
│   │   └── chess_evaluation.py
│   └── web/                 # Web interface
│       ├── app.py           # Flask application
│       └── templates/       # HTML templates
├── data/                     # Data management
│   ├── raw/                 # Raw datasets
│   ├── processed/           # Processed data
│   └── datasets/            # Training datasets
├── models/                   # Model storage
├── checkpoints/             # Training checkpoints
├── tests/                   # Unit tests
└── scripts/                 # Utility scripts
```

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Training Pipeline** (`src/training/`)
   - LoRA fine-tuning with Unsloth
   - Multiple configuration options
   - Checkpoint management
   - Resume functionality

2. **Inference Engine** (`src/inference/`)
   - Model loading and caching
   - Chess-specific prompt formatting
   - Response generation and validation

3. **Chess Engine Integration** (`src/inference/chess_engine.py`)
   - Stockfish integration
   - Move validation
   - Position analysis
   - Tactical pattern recognition

4. **Web Interface** (`src/web/`)
   - Flask-based web application
   - Interactive Q&A interface
   - Chess board visualization
   - Model status monitoring

5. **Evaluation Framework** (`src/evaluation/`)
   - Chess-specific metrics
   - Model performance testing
   - Quality assessment tools

## Training Guide

### Configuration Files

Training configurations are located in `src/training/configs/`:

- `lora.yaml` - Basic LoRA configuration
- `lora_full.yaml` - Full training setup
- `lora_expanded.yaml` - Enhanced training with expanded dataset

### Training Process

1. **Prepare dataset:**
```bash
python data/prepare_dataset.py --output_dir data/processed
```

2. **Run training:**
```bash
python src/training/train.py --config src/training/configs/lora_full.yaml
```

3. **Monitor progress:**
```bash
# Training logs are saved to checkpoints/
tail -f checkpoints/lora_full/train_log.jsonl
```

### Training Parameters

Key parameters for fine-tuning:

- **Model**: `unsloth/gemma-3-270m-it` (270M parameters)
- **LoRA Rank**: 16-32 (adjustable)
- **Learning Rate**: 1e-4 to 2e-4
- **Batch Size**: 4-8 (depending on available memory)
- **Max Steps**: 1000-2000 for full training

## Configuration

### Model Configuration

The system supports multiple model configurations:

```yaml
model:
  pretrained_model_path: "models/unsloth-gemma-3-270m-it/..."
  max_seq_length: 2048
  dtype: "float16"

lora:
  r: 32
  lora_alpha: 64
  target_modules: ["q_proj", "v_proj", "k_proj", "o_proj"]
  dropout: 0.05
```

### Training Configuration

```yaml
training:
  output_dir: "checkpoints/lora_full"
  per_device_train_batch_size: 4
  gradient_accumulation_steps: 8
  learning_rate: 1e-4
  max_steps: 2000
  logging_steps: 50
  save_steps: 200
```

## Testing

### Run Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
python -m pytest tests/

# Run specific test
python -m pytest tests/test_inference.py
```

### Evaluation

```bash
# Run chess evaluation
python src/evaluation/chess_evaluation.py

# Compare model performance
python compare_chess_qa.py
```

## Performance

### Training Performance

- **Memory Usage**: ~4-6GB VRAM (with MPS)
- **Training Speed**: ~2-3 steps/second on M3 MacBook Pro
- **Convergence**: Loss typically drops from 3.0 to 1.2 in 100 steps

### Model Performance

- **Chess Relevance**: ~85% for chess-specific questions
- **Move Accuracy**: ~70% for basic chess moves
- **Response Quality**: Improved over base model

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **MPS not available:**
   ```bash
   # Check MPS availability
   python -c "import torch; print(torch.backends.mps.is_available())"
   ```

2. **Out of memory:**
   - Reduce batch size in config
   - Enable gradient checkpointing
   - Use CPU fallback

3. **Stockfish not found:**
   ```bash
   # Install Stockfish
   brew install stockfish
   # Or set custom path in chess_engine.py
   ```

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging:

```bash
export PYTHONPATH=$PWD
python -c "import logging; logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)"
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests for new functionality
5. Submit a pull request

### Development Setup

```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install pytest black flake8

# Run code formatting
black src/ tests/
flake8 src/ tests/
```

## Roadmap

### Completed
- [x] Basic LoRA fine-tuning pipeline
- [x] Chess engine integration
- [x] Web interface
- [x] Multiple training configurations
- [x] Evaluation framework

### In Progress
- [ ] Enhanced dataset generation
- [ ] Improved evaluation metrics
- [ ] Better error handling

### Planned
- [ ] Multi-model support
- [ ] Advanced chess analysis
- [ ] Mobile app interface
- [ ] Cloud deployment options

### Future Development
For detailed information about the evolution to GemmaFischer (chess engine + tutor), see [PROJECT_PLAN.md](docs/PROJECT_PLAN.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- **Google**: For the Gemma-3 model
- **Unsloth**: For the efficient fine-tuning framework
- **Stockfish**: For the chess engine
- **Hugging Face**: For the transformers library
- **Thytu**: For the ChessInstruct dataset

## Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs and feature requests on GitHub
- **Discussions**: Join community discussions
- **Documentation**: Check the `docs/` folder for detailed guides

---

**ChessGemma** - A chess AI system for question answering and analysis.

Commit message:

feat: Implement GemmaFischer UCI bridge and dual-mode training
- Add UCI bridge module for chess software integration
- Create prompt templates for engine and tutor modes
- Update documentation to reflect GemmaFischer project plan
- Add new dependencies for embeddings, PGN processing, and vector search
- Implement dual-mode training support (engine vs tutor)
- Add style conditioning for different playing styles
- Create chain-of-thought reasoning integration
- Add test script for UCI bridge functionality

This implements the core infrastructure for the GemmaFischer evolution
as outlined in the project plan, enabling both chess engine and tutor
functionality with UCI compatibility.

README.md, after:

# GemmaFischer: Chess LLM Engine + Tutor

A dual-purpose chess AI system that fine-tunes Google's Gemma-3 270M model to function as both a chess engine (UCI-compatible) and a chess tutor/analyst using LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) on Apple Silicon with MPS acceleration.

## Project Overview

GemmaFischer combines several components:
- **Fine-tuned Language Model**: Gemma-3 270M with LoRA adapters for chess knowledge
- **UCI Bridge Layer**: Full UCI protocol compatibility for chess software integration
- **Dual-Mode Operation**: Engine mode (fast moves) and Tutor mode (explanations)
- **Chain-of-Thought Reasoning**: Step-by-step analysis and explanation
- **Chess Engine Integration**: Stockfish integration for move validation and analysis
- **Web Interface**: Flask-based web application for interaction
- **Evaluation Framework**: Chess-specific metrics and testing tools

## Key Features

- **Efficient Training**: LoRA fine-tuning with Unsloth optimization
- **Apple Silicon Support**: MPS acceleration for M-series Macs
- **Chess Engine Integration**: Stockfish for move validation and position analysis
- **Web Interface**: Interactive chess Q&A interface
- **Evaluation Tools**: Chess-specific metrics and testing framework
- **Multiple Training Configurations**: Flexible training setups for different use cases

## Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+
- Apple Silicon Mac (M1/M2/M3) or compatible system
- 8GB+ RAM (16GB recommended)
- Stockfish chess engine (optional, for advanced features)

### Installation

1. **Clone and setup environment:**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/lukifer23/GemmaFischer.git
cd GemmaFischer
python -m venv .venv
source .venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: .venv\Scripts\activate
```

2. **Install dependencies:**
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

3. **Install Stockfish (optional):**
```bash
# macOS with Homebrew
brew install stockfish

# Or download from https://stockfishchess.org/download/
```

### Basic Usage

1. **Run inference with pre-trained model:**
```bash
python src/inference/inference.py --download
```

2. **Start web interface:**
```bash
python src/web/app.py
# Visit http://localhost:5000
```

3. **Run training (smoke test):**
```bash
python src/training/train.py --do_train --max_steps 10
```

## Project Structure

```
GemmaFischer/
├── README.md                 # This file
├── requirements.txt          # Python dependencies
├── docs/                     # Documentation
│   ├── ARCHITECTURE.md      # System architecture
│   ├── TRAINING_GUIDE.md    # Training instructions
│   ├── API_REFERENCE.md     # API documentation
│   └── PROJECT_PLAN.md      # Future development roadmap
├── src/                      # Source code
│   ├── training/            # Training scripts
│   │   ├── train.py         # Main training script
│   │   ├── train_lora_poc.py # LoRA proof-of-concept
│   │   └── configs/         # Training configurations
│   ├── inference/           # Inference and chess engine
│   │   ├── inference.py     # Model inference
│   │   └── chess_engine.py  # Stockfish integration
│   ├── evaluation/          # Evaluation and testing
│   │   └── chess_evaluation.py
│   └── web/                 # Web interface
│       ├── app.py           # Flask application
│       └── templates/       # HTML templates
├── data/                     # Data management
│   ├── raw/                 # Raw datasets
│   ├── processed/           # Processed data
│   └── datasets/            # Training datasets
├── models/                   # Model storage
├── checkpoints/             # Training checkpoints
├── tests/                   # Unit tests
└── scripts/                 # Utility scripts
```

## Architecture

### Core Components

1. **Training Pipeline** (`src/training/`)
   - LoRA fine-tuning with Unsloth
   - Multiple configuration options
   - Checkpoint management
   - Resume functionality

2. **Inference Engine** (`src/inference/`)
   - Model loading and caching
   - Chess-specific prompt formatting
   - Response generation and validation

3. **Chess Engine Integration** (`src/inference/chess_engine.py`)
   - Stockfish integration
   - Move validation
   - Position analysis
   - Tactical pattern recognition

4. **Web Interface** (`src/web/`)
   - Flask-based web application
   - Interactive Q&A interface
   - Chess board visualization
   - Model status monitoring

5. **Evaluation Framework** (`src/evaluation/`)
   - Chess-specific metrics
   - Model performance testing
   - Quality assessment tools

## Training Guide

### Configuration Files

Training configurations are located in `src/training/configs/`:

- `lora.yaml` - Basic LoRA configuration
- `lora_full.yaml` - Full training setup
- `lora_expanded.yaml` - Enhanced training with expanded dataset

### Training Process

1. **Prepare dataset:**
```bash
python data/prepare_dataset.py --output_dir data/processed
```

2. **Run training:**
```bash
python src/training/train.py --config src/training/configs/lora_full.yaml
```

3. **Monitor progress:**
```bash
# Training logs are saved to checkpoints/
tail -f checkpoints/lora_full/train_log.jsonl
```

### Training Parameters

Key parameters for fine-tuning:

- **Model**: `unsloth/gemma-3-270m-it` (270M parameters)
- **LoRA Rank**: 16-32 (adjustable)
- **Learning Rate**: 1e-4 to 2e-4
- **Batch Size**: 4-8 (depending on available memory)
- **Max Steps**: 1000-2000 for full training

## Configuration

### Model Configuration

The system supports multiple model configurations:

```yaml
model:
  pretrained_model_path: "models/unsloth-gemma-3-270m-it/..."
  max_seq_length: 2048
  dtype: "float16"

lora:
  r: 32
  lora_alpha: 64
  target_modules: ["q_proj", "v_proj", "k_proj", "o_proj"]
  dropout: 0.05
```

### Training Configuration

```yaml
training:
  output_dir: "checkpoints/lora_full"
  per_device_train_batch_size: 4
  gradient_accumulation_steps: 8
  learning_rate: 1e-4
  max_steps: 2000
  logging_steps: 50
  save_steps: 200
```

## Testing

### Run Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
python -m pytest tests/

# Run specific test
python -m pytest tests/test_inference.py
```

### Evaluation

```bash
# Run chess evaluation
python src/evaluation/chess_evaluation.py

# Compare model performance
python compare_chess_qa.py
```

## Performance

### Training Performance

- **Memory Usage**: ~4-6GB VRAM (with MPS)
- **Training Speed**: ~2-3 steps/second on M3 MacBook Pro
- **Convergence**: Loss typically drops from 3.0 to 1.2 in 100 steps

### Model Performance

- **Chess Relevance**: ~85% for chess-specific questions
- **Move Accuracy**: ~70% for basic chess moves
- **Response Quality**: Improved over base model

## Troubleshooting

### Common Issues

1. **MPS not available:**
   ```bash
   # Check MPS availability
   python -c "import torch; print(torch.backends.mps.is_available())"
   ```

2. **Out of memory:**
   - Reduce batch size in config
   - Enable gradient checkpointing
   - Use CPU fallback

3. **Stockfish not found:**
   ```bash
   # Install Stockfish
   brew install stockfish
   # Or set custom path in chess_engine.py
   ```

### Debug Mode

Enable debug logging:

```bash
export PYTHONPATH=$PWD
python -c "import logging; logging.basicConfig(level=logging.DEBUG)"
```

## Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests for new functionality
5. Submit a pull request

### Development Setup

```bash
# Install development dependencies
pip install -r requirements.txt
pip install pytest black flake8

# Run code formatting
black src/ tests/
flake8 src/ tests/
```

## Roadmap

### Completed
- [x] Basic LoRA fine-tuning pipeline
- [x] Chess engine integration
- [x] Web interface
- [x] Multiple training configurations
- [x] Evaluation framework

### In Progress
- [ ] Enhanced dataset generation
- [ ] Improved evaluation metrics
- [ ] Better error handling

### Planned
- [ ] Multi-model support
- [ ] Advanced chess analysis
- [ ] Mobile app interface
- [ ] Cloud deployment options

### Future Development
For detailed information about the evolution to GemmaFischer (chess engine + tutor), see [PROJECT_PLAN.md](docs/PROJECT_PLAN.md).

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

## Acknowledgments

- **Google**: For the Gemma-3 model
- **Unsloth**: For the efficient fine-tuning framework
- **Stockfish**: For the chess engine
- **Hugging Face**: For the transformers library
- **Thytu**: For the ChessInstruct dataset

## Support

- **Issues**: Report bugs and feature requests on GitHub
- **Discussions**: Join community discussions
- **Documentation**: Check the `docs/` folder for detailed guides

---

**ChessGemma** - A chess AI system for question answering and analysis.
